core cloud beifits :-
01.high availability
02.scalability 
03.elasticity
04.realiability
05.predictibility
06.security
07.governance
08.manageability

01.:- high availability :- 
services available 24/7 
e.g. :- amazon , netflix , banking services

02. scalability :- 
it will increase or decrease resources 
        i. vertical scaling (to increase ram and cpu )

        ii.horizontal scaling (for adding more servers )

03. elasticity :- automatic scaling according to demand 
e.g. 100 users ---> 1000 users ----> azure will iccrease scaling automatically as per demand 
increase resources and when traffic will be less automatically resources will be less

04. realiability :- 
service will runs  actively after system fails .
e.g. if one data center will be down then automatically second data centerv continue its service 

05. predictability  :- 
it estimates  performance and cost .
e.g. it estimates cost before azure cost calculator . 

06. security :- 
to protect data and applications 
e.g. MFA (multifactor authentications)
    encryption 
    firewall 

07. governance :- 
it applies rules and policies 
e.g. it gives permission to developer only create VM 

08.manageability :- 
to manage resources easily 
  e.g.  azure portal 
         azure CLI 
         power shell


capex vs opex :- 
capex (capital expenditure ) :- own data center 
opex (operatioanl expenditure ) :- rent or pay for that what they use 
 in capex  one time big investement needed 
 e.g.   buying server 
        making data center 
        buying network devices  
in opex pay for that as much you use 
e.g.     azure Vm 
        AWS EC2
        azure storage 


        capex :- buy                                    opex :- rent
                high upfront cost                               low upfront cost 
                own hardware                                    cloud provider hardware 
                maintenance yours                               maintennance provider 



 Consumption - based model  :- 
 golden rule of cloud 
 use what you need , pay for that what you use. 

Azure regions :- 
a geographical area in which one or more data centers are available known as azure regions 
e.g.        east us 
            central india 
            west europe 
            south india 

benifits :- 
low latency (fast performance ) , betterv performance , local complience requirements .

Data centers :- a physical building in which servers are connected known as data centers .

availability zone :- 
in region different physically separated locations  ,  it makes servers highly available  and fault - tolerant .
if one zone fails second zone will automatically cotinue its work . 


data center :-       physical building 
region :-            area containing one or more data centers 
availability zone :-  backup locations inside a region 

Resources group :- 
a logical container used to manage and organizes azure resources . 
e.g. one folder contains many files
like game ;- free fire 
            pubg 
            call of duty 

 benifits :- resources organized
            easy management and deletion 
            applies access control 
 


